hello to everyone watching us here in W
headquarters in Geneva for the regular
press conference on kovat 19 we have as
we had in a previous day's simultaneous
translation in six UN languages plus
Portuguese so we hope we will get
questions in those languages and I would
like to thank interpreters who are here
with us today we have with us dr. Petrus
W director-general dr. Maria Van Kirk
Kove
technical lead and head of emergency
program dr. dr. Mike Ryan we also have a
mr. Steve Solomon principal legal
officer in case questions come for him
before we opened before I give the
remarks to to to to give the floor to
dr. terrors for his opening remarks just
to remind you that we have been sending
you press releases as well as invitation
for press conferences of our regional
offices and own activities from our
different sections so I'll give a floor
to dr. Tetris for his opening remarks
thank you thank you Tarek good morning
good afternoon and good evening ten days
ago I joined President Emmanuel macron
president Ursula Van der Lane and
Melinda Gates to launch the ESET
accelerator to support the development
production and equitable distribution of
vaccines diagnostics and therapeutics
against kovat 19 today leaders from 40
countries all over the world came
together
to support the ESET accelerator through
the kovat 19 global response
international pledging event hosted by
the European Commission during today's
event some 7.4 billion euros was pledged
for research and development for
vaccines diagnostics and therapeutics
this was a powerful and inspiring
demonstration of global solidarity today
countries came together not only to
pledge their financial support but to
also pledge their commitment to ensuring
all people can access life-saving tools
for kovat 19 accelerating development of
the products but at the same time access
to all recent advances in science are
enabling the world to move at incredible
speed to develop this tools but the true
measure of success will not only be how
fast we can develop safe and effective
tools it will be how equally we can
distribute them none of us can accept a
world in which some people are protected
while others are not everybody should be
protected none of us are safe until all
of us are safe the potential for
continued waves of infection of covered
19 across the globe demands that every
single person on the planet be protected
from this disease wh-whoa remains
committed to working with all countries
and partners to accelerate the
development and production of vaccines
diagnostics and therapeutics and to
ensure their equitable
distribution this is an opportunity for
the world to come together to confront a
common threat but also to forge a common
future a future in which all people
enjoy the right to the highest
attainable standard of Health and the
products that deliver that right that's
what we mean by health for all we have
been saying it for the last more than 70
years since the WTO was created but I
think given the experience we have now
and the difficult swill going through
its time to make it happen health for
all but one of the best tools is also
one of the most basic clean hands the
simple act of cleaning hands can be the
difference between life and death and
remains one of the most important public
health measures for protecting
individuals families and communities
against kovat 19 and many other diseases
tomorrow is hand hygiene day a reminder
of the importance of clean hands for
health workers and for all of us at the
same time we must remember that millions
of people around the world are not able
to practice this most basic of
precautions around the world less than
two thirds of health care facilities are
equipped with hand hygiene stations and
three billion people like soap and water
at home this is an old problem that
requires new and vastly increased
attention if we're to stop covered 19 or
any other source of infection and keep
health workers say
we must dramatically increase
investments in soap access to water and
alcohol-based hand rubs tomorrow also
marks the International Day of the
Midwife this is an opportunity to
remember the vital role that midwives
play all over the world in providing
safe and effective care for women and
newborns
research shows that interventions
delivered by midwives can avert over 80%
of all maternal deaths still births and
neonatal deaths the service of midwives
is actually a lifeline for many
childbirth can be one of the most
precious moments in a woman's life but
it can also be one of the most dangerous
as you know midwives are essential for
guiding and caring for women through
their entire pregnancy and the critical
moment of childbirth but we need more
midwives in all countries especially low
resource countries to mark hand hygiene
day and the International Day of the
Midwife we're calling all people to stop
what they're doing at noon tomorrow
to clap for nurses and midwives and
thank them for their role in delivering
safe and effective care especially
during this pandemic they're risking
their life and to protect or to give
life to others several countries are now
starting to ease so-called
lockdown and stay at home orders
but our common commitment to basic
measures such as cleaning hands and
physical distancing cannot be relaxed
nor can the commitment to the tools that
are the foundation of the response to
find isolate test and care for every
case and tress every contact when to
ensure health systems have the capacity
they need to provide safe and effective
care for all but just at the number of
new cases and deaths is declining in
some countries it's mounting in others
that's why today's pledging event is so
important this virus will be with us for
a long time and we must come together to
develop and share the tools to defeat it
but of course today's event only covers
one part of the response for research
and development in vaccines diagnostics
and therapeutics in the weeks and months
ahead we will need much more to meet the
demand for personal protective equipment
medical oxygen and other essential
supplies later this week WH er will
launch its updated strategic
preparedness and response plan which
will provide an update of the resources
wh ER needs to support the international
response and international and national
action plans to the to the end of 2020
wh ER is grateful to the many countries
and donors who support the first
strategic and response preparedness and
response plan and we are also grateful
to the more than 300 thousand
individuals corporations and foundations
who have contributed to the Solidarity
response fund which has generated more
than 210 million u.s. dollars in just
six weeks
as my friend Boris Johnson said during
today's pledging event we're in this
together
and together we will prevail we will
prevail through national unity and
global solidarity the antidote to this
virus our national unity and global
solidarity the antidote to this virus is
the human spirit thank you to be very
brief and ask only one question so we
can try to take as many as possible and
again you can ask the question in
languages plus Portuguese for join us to
our own zoom you will need to go to
settings to find your language and for
because of a bug we have Arabic is under
Korean so if you want to listen in
Arabic you have to click on Korean
that's a bug that we have in a zoo and
it's not really our fault we will start
with F a news agency yes do you hear me
yes thank you
yeah that's a boy yes sir laughington
espanol gracias por tomar esta pregunta
in barrio spices we sing cojones ludos
algunos America latina las formas estan
metiendo test a diagnostic Jose Cobra
Valley dos para que la gente puede hacer
sestos tez en sus casas en algo en
algunas pisces est siendo con autores
ation de las autoridades Sagittarius en
otros pases de manera mas o menos
informal Sierra's
or MSA are consejo de la gente puede ser
see people doubt the agnostic owes ellos
mismos see crane que estos test son
fireblaze y como a value el Ria's lo de
que una persona conifers o resultado
negativo sikri que estos tes no son see
a blaze que sta sana a poet OS materia
sobre todo hora que muchos Price's esta
a la Hondo when Payson Arella har las
medidas a consonant thank you for the
question so there there are a number of
diagnostic tests that are currently
available in our being sold globally in
fact there's hundreds of them and the
tests that you're referring to are these
molecular tests are these PCR based
tests that can diagnose somebody is
having active infection it's difficult
to answer that question because I don't
know exactly which tests you're
referring to what is really important is
that the tests that are being used by
any governments or being sold that
there's clear results of how well these
tests work there are the possibilities
that if they are not validated we call
validated where we test them against
known samples of whether the samples are
indeed positive or negative it's very
difficult to know if the test result
that you're getting is a true result and
as you've highlighted there are risks
associated with having a false positive
in thinking that you are infected and
you are indeed not and more importantly
if you test false negative
we're in fact you are infected and the
test tells you that you're not so there
are some risks associated with being
being being sold over the owner having
said that you know the the ingenuity the
the rapid development of these tests is
very positive and and we welcome this
innovation we welcome the speed at which
these tests are being made available but
it is important that they're validated
it's important that we really understand
how well they work bottom line though is
that everyone that is out there needs to
adhere to public health measures
regardless these include hand hygiene
that the DG has just mentioned
and you've heard us mention well with
washing your hands with soap and water
or an alcohol alcohol-based rub practice
physical distancing so where you're
physically distant from another person
adhering to the public health measures
that are put in place by governments
practicing respiratory etiquette
these are the things that must be
adhered to all the time while we work
through the use of some of these tests
that are that are that are coming online
thank you very much dr. Vanko hope this
answers the question itself testing next
question is from John from meetings
today John can you hear us John can you
unmute yourself please Ted okay thanks
Mary now thank you
meetings and conventions are part of the
tauren travel industry and we are
incredibly confused about how whu-oh
classifies mass gatherings around the
world and in the u.s. groups don't know
what that means we're finding different
standards within the United States and I
just saw someone mentioned what France
is doing in terms of the ability to
travel to meetings we need guidelines
about how WTO defines mass gathering and
and how we're going to go forward thank
you so thank you for the question I'll
start maybe Mike would like to
supplement so the question around mass
gatherings there's there's different
ways in which people are defining
gatherings just gatherings in general in
terms of you've seen different
governments put in place more than five
people no more than 10 people no more
than 50 people mass gatherings are
obviously much larger than that what we
do is we have put out guidance which
provides a risk assessment based
approach that evaluates each guide at
each gathering as it is defined as it is
developed what is the gathering itself
where is it taking place how many people
are involved in it is there any way in
which
can be done remotely or through through
video is there a way it can be postponed
and so what we're trying to do is lay
out the criteria in which those
decisions can be made those decisions
must be made on a case-by-case basis
because not all situations are the same
the the area in which they are carried
out have different ventilations have
some are outdoor some are indoors so it
depends
it's an unsatisfactory answer because we
can't give you a yes or no but what we
try to do is we try to outline all of
their criteria that you would need to
take to be able to make that decision
the same holds true for travel you know
the same holds true for holding meeting
some places all of those decisions to
meet need to be taken on a case-by-case
basis to determine if indeed that
meeting needs to take place and if so
how that could be done safely thank you
very much dr. monkey cool next question
is Radio France Internationale Jeremy
can you hear us yes can you hear me
thank you
I just had a quick question regarding
mass gatherings also I heard that France
is considering reopening movie theatres
for instance and I would like to have
your opinion that do you think these
kind of measures this kind of is too
early because we can think of mass
gatherings to it in movie theatres where
hundreds of people are living in the
same place so do you consider it to be a
good measure or not Thanks yeah I think
we need to make a distinction here
between what would classically be
regarded as mass gatherings which are
large religious events big sporting
events where thousands and thousands of
people come together and approach one
point and then leave from a point and
they're coming
potentially from across national
boundaries or within national boundaries
so they're gathering events when land
their large-scale they're often
multinational and require and involve
the movement not just the presence of
many people in an area but potentially
the movement of people to and from those
areas movie theaters churches and other
gatherings are more localized events and
they have to be dealt with within the
the local context gobhi can prescribe to
individual countries
what exactly is to be done in every
single context what we do advise is
anywhere where people gather where they
cannot maintain social distance or
physical distance or appropriate hygiene
then there's always a risk in the
presence of the virus that that you may
amplify the virus and we've seen that
nurse plenty evidence that that has
happened in the past so as countries
open up their economies and open up to
societies and as they look at different
gatherings be their religious or social
gatherings that occur they've got to
calibrate the risks associated with
those gatherings which are based on how
much virus is circulating in the area so
what is the absolute risk of exposure
and then what are the increased risks of
being exposed in an environment where
there are a number of people who cannot
maintain physical distance or
potentially maintain hygiene or other
measures and you can see within that
that many governments and companies
private and public are looking at what
are the well the measures that need to
be put in place in for example
restricting access to less than full
capacity or some proportion of capacity
to having spacing between seating to
having extra hygiene and Clint at
disinfection measures put in place
having online ticketing there's lots of
different measures that for each
individual service or each individual
gathering can be put in place the same
with with churches so again as the
Director General has said in his speech
exiting the more severe public health
and social distance
your physical distancing measures or the
lockdowns or stay-at-home orders and
allowing people to re-engage in social
any common economic life must come with
a risk managed approach how do we
minimize the risk of transmission
between individuals while obviously
trying to maximize the way in which
people can re-engage in their normal
lives and that is determined by the
presence of the virus that is determined
by the risk of the encounter or the risk
of the particular environment which
people will come to and the means and
the the the the ability of both the
government local governments communities
and private sector owners to minimize
those risks to participants or to
clients thank you very much dr. Ryan
next question comes from Italy Luca
Rossini from Rui Luca regarding the
contrasts in tracing what would you
suggest to country like Italy to
integrate manual and digital contact
racing in order to speed up not only the
national process of contour tracing but
even the the broader process of
international process of concentration
that which is very important when the
border will be opened again thank you
and I think this is a challenge that's
facing many countries right now so I
won't answer it in the specific context
of Italy I think when you speak to
professionals in Korea and Singapore
about what they did to make their
contact tracing more effective they will
first move all of us tell you that they
got more boots on the ground that they
went back to the basics of public health
finding cases a community level
community based surveillance putting
more surveillance officers out there
following up with people making the
phone calls knocking on people's doors
finding out who could have been
exposed and ensuring that those who are
suspected or tested and isolated and
then ensure that those who are in
contact are given that information so
they can protect themselves and their
families and are offered either a home
quarantine or quarantine in a third
place and this has all been aimed at
breaking the chains of transmission if
someone who is infected has no further
contact with other people other than
protective health workers their chances
of passing on the disease are minimized
if a contact who's developing disease is
aware of that and reports symptoms
immediately the chances of them
infecting someone else decreases very
very importantly and this is all going
to that number that everyone talks about
the or number or the or knows the
capacity of one individual to infect any
other individual contact tracing and
case finding is not about surveillance
or interrupting people's lives it's
about trying to identify those
individuals who are sick and in trying
to ensure that those sick individuals
are tested and cared for and that anyone
who was in contact with them is
monitored and then subsequently tested
and cared for if needed
in doing that we reduce their role in
spreading the disease to others that is
essentially a human process and it needs
to have a human face because these are
difficult times for cases and for
context what has emerged
w-h-o for example for a number of years
has been working on a system called goal
data which is an integrated information
system which is app based which allows
public health authorities to integrate
all of the different data the case state
of the contact data the laboratory data
and we've rolled that out to a number of
countries over the last number of months
and and with increasing frequency now
during Corbett 19 and are willing to
offer that any country that wishes to
implement it the addition of apps that
people themselves can have on their
telephones that will give them
information on their disease status or
notify them if they've been in contact
with an individual that that is infected
can obviously enhance the effectiveness
of contact tracing and surveillance
and we've seen various examples of that
emerge around the world and be put to
use they are an additional measure that
will potentially enhance the efficiency
of the contact tracing process but they
won't do it by themselves in doing that
and we're very grateful for those
countries and those companies and those
innovators who are working on such tools
and we're talking with them every day
what we need to ensure as we roll out
those tools number one that they enhance
that process and they're not seen as a
replacement for shoe-leather
epidemiology they're not seen as a
replacement for the basic human
workforce the army we need to go out
there and find cases they can enhance
the work of that workforce but they
can't do the work of that workforce if
we add those tools and give an extra
boost to that process and become more
efficient then we get rid of this virus
more quickly but we also have to
consider and very carefully within this
that these tools must be used for that
purpose and that purpose alone and we
have to take into account people's
personal data protection protection of
of their data protection of their
privacy and ultimately protection of
their human rights I think all countries
are trying to approach this in a very
balanced manner but we do believe that
such tools are useful we very very
grateful to see the innovation but we
are very very keen to stress that IT
tools do not replace the basic public
health workforce that is going to be
needed to trace test isolate and
quarantine thank you very much from
Italy we go to a Brazil and a Pinto from
Sao Paulo thanks for taking my question
I ask in Portuguese so it provided the
translators Otomo's years ago estado
esta most rod oke appeases keynoting so
uma couvreux da da da effects on poor
coronavirus Madawaska verse o Makovec a
certain demise happy dementia care dose
because my cycles ahkamaat psychosis
yatra Kovach overdose my strawberries he
continued a crescendo ago studied some a
CSI America so the organs are enjoyed
solji so the sustained registrado is
phenomenal in other spices he sees
positive influence mass political school
because others others nest spices quando
as populous mais vous nervous
teng menos for the judges our main two
menos vas been through the formulas
understood each gospel because ricotta
may go into the detail but I think it is
as to whether or not we're seeing this
phenomenon but it is very important and
the director-general said this many
times no one is safe until everyone is
safe and we cannot leave anyone behind
and we have to absolutely ensure the
public health surveillance and testing
is available to all who need it and it
is very important that testing is not
seen as their as their as the purview of
the wealthy or those who can afford it
this isn't about testing people from a
clinical perspective only this is about
testing people so we know where the
virus is and therefore if the if people
see the purpose of testing in just
getting my diagnosis so that I can go
and get pay for treatment and that in is
a distortion of the ultimate purpose of
testing testing is aimed at doing two
things one is giving people with
symptoms an opportunity to be tested so
they can get the proper care but it also
triggers a whole series of activities to
understand the transmission and dynamics
of the virus
so if access to testing is determined by
by resources then there's going to be a
very skewed understanding of where the
virus actually is and that's very
dangerous
that's dangerous from a public health
perspective is not only is it
inequitable it is also dangerous so it's
very important that that testing is made
available to those who need it and in
fact in some cases I believe the testing
should be
or available in areas where people don't
have the opportunity to physical
distance where they may have higher
rates of infection and in fact may also
have higher rates of death if they are
infected we've seen with many vulnerable
populations we've seen with ethnic
minorities we've seen with indigenous
people that they may have higher death
rates when they are infected because of
underlying conditions because of
long-standing underlying conditions so
it is all the more important that we
have early testing of people who may
have those underlying conditions so if
anything testing should be prioritized
in areas where there's underprivileged
where there's overcrowding where there's
poverty but it is I'm not aware of this
emerging systematically in our data but
but certainly if this phenomenon is
happening then this is a very wrong
direction because it is not only an
equitable or unjust it is also a
dangerous direction because you will not
know where the virus is and you will not
be able to detect those who need need
care of the most may be to supplement
what Mike has said so the the speed of
in which the virus can transmit relates
to the contact between infected people
and so we have seen in a number of urban
areas the ability for the virus to
spread we've also seen this in less
populated areas it just because there's
an urban area that has a ceding of this
virus or the virus being detected
doesn't mean that it has to take off the
ability of our our ability to suppress
transmission relates to detecting people
with the virus so it relates to testing
it relates to the surveillance strategy
that is in a country and how how
countries are actually looking for cases
it relates to the ability to isolate
known cases if those cases who are known
are isolated in a healthcare facility
and are treated are provided care
depending on the severity of their since
symptoms then they are taken out of the
general population then and they can't
transmit to other people if contact
tracing is happening comprehensively
we're contacts of known cases our are
identified
those contacts are quarantine then if
they develop symptoms they're already in
quarantine they don't have the ability
to infect somebody else so it's all
about the ability of this virus to find
another person to infect and if we stop
that if we break that chain of
transmission that's what we mean we
actually mean taking breaking one the
the chain of transmission from one
person who's infected to passing it on
to another one to pass on to another to
pass out another if we're able to break
that then we can prevent that from
transmitting further but it is important
to know how cases are being detected in
a country it's important to know how
once they are detected how they are
cared for and isolated and if contact
tracing is occurring but just because a
virus is identified in an urban area
doesn't mean that it has to take off and
we've seen a number of countries that
have been able to prevent that from
happening whether it's through the
public health measures or it's through
these more advanced stay at home orders
but it is possible to suppress
transmission and to break those chains
of transmission too much and next
question is coming from Savio Rodriguez
from Goa Chronicle Savio can you hear us
yeah can you Yami yes please go ahead
okay my question is for dr. Ted Rose on
December 31st 2019 the Taiwan Center for
Disease Control sent an email to the
World Health Organization informing who
of its understanding of the disease and
requesting for more information in that
email they use the word atypical
pneumonia which they claim is a word
commonly used to refer to SARS a disease
transmitted between humans
why did who not take Taiwan CDC
observation seriously is my question
thank you thank you sir yeah I think mr.
Solomon will take this one
Thank You Torian thanks very much for
the question
it's appreciated because it gives us an
opportunity to set the record straight
which I'd like to do right away and then
I'd also like to address questions of
their participation at w-h-o meetings
because these questions continue to come
up as well so did Taiwan warn whu-oh on
31 December 2019 the answer is no they
didn't they did send an email but that
email was not a warning it was a request
for more information on cases of
atypical pneumonia reported by news
sources they sent that request through
the ihr system that Taiwan China and all
ihr focal points are part of the email
asked for more information more
information about news reports that
w-h-o and most public health services
already knew about others in fact sent
similar emails that same day also asking
for more information these reports about
atypical pneumonia cases came from Wuhan
itself on the internet and they came
through a website run by promed that's
an acronym for program for monitoring
emerging diseases the reports were
therefore already available and the
Taiwanese email just requested in very
kind terms more information why then has
this story of warning continued to
circulate well the answer to that is in
part because of the rules for the ihr
system itself that is the electronic
communication system supporting the
international health regulations and
it's focal points from around the world
these focal points around the world are
the direct channel to w-h-o for
information about disease outbreaks the
communications are confidential in order
to promote openness within the ihr
system so until Taiwan CDC India
that they didn't expect confidentiality
about that email we couldn't offer
details then on 11th of April that
changed Taiwan's authorities held up the
email at a media briefing since Taiwan
has made the message public I'll read
out the full content today it reads and
I'm quoting in full news resources today
indicate that at least seven atypical
pneumonia cases were reported in Wuhan
China their health authorities replied
to the media that the cases were
believed not SARS
however the samples are still under
examination and cases have been isolated
for treatment I would greatly appreciate
it
if you have relevant and information to
share with us thank you very much in
advance for your attention to this
matter best regards the email wasn't a
warning and it only contained
information that w-h-o already had
picked up from internet reports it's
also important to say that the Wuhan
situation had already been captured by
whu-oh on that day 31 December 2019
w-h-o activated its incident management
protocols the next day on January 1st
and then along with embedded scientists
from other governments w-h-o began the
work which continues to this day
analyzing the data and seeking
additional information on the 4th of
January w-h-o provided information about
this situation publicly on the 5th of
January
waho shared detailed technical
information through this ihr system this
included advice to all Member States and
all ihr focal points to take precautions
to reduce the risk of acute respiratory
infections providing guidance on the
basis that there could be human to human
transmission on the 10th and the 11th of
January w-h-o published a comprehensive
package of guidance on how to detect
test for and manage cases and protect
health workers from potential
human-to-human transmission based on our
previous experience with coronaviruses
and as you know there was a global press
briefing on January 14th where w-h-o
spoke about likely scenarios around
human to human transmission I hope
that's helpful in understanding the
December 31st email we know there are
also questions about Taiwan's
participation in w-h-o expert meetings
and questions about their participation
in the world health assembly
w-h-o is an inter governmental
organization meaning that countries
decide how they organize how the
organization is structured and on its
policies some 49 years ago the UN and
whu-oh decided that there was only one
legitimate representative of China
within the UN system and that is the
People's Republic of China that decision
still stands whu-oh is also a
specialized agency of the United Nations
and as such aligns with the UN and must
do so coherently the work of w-h-o staff
in line with our Constitution is to
promote the health of all people
everywhere and to assist with but not
decide on issues at the World Health
Assembly so regarding expert meetings on
technical health matters last year
Taiwanese experts were included at 8
expert meetings and there were six other
informal technical meetings this year in
response to kovat 19 Taiwanese experts
are involved in key groups and networks
we've had telephone conferences with
their CDC doctor Van Kirk Kove and
myself and will do so again and as noted
there at our contact point links their
CDC directly to w-h-o headquarters in
the covert 19 response especially they
have had notable successes and we
appreciate their contributions regarding
the World Health Assembly the next one
will be in two weeks starting on May
18th
the involvement if
any of Taiwanese observers in that
assembly is a question for the 194
governments of w-h-o this is not
something that whu-oh Secretariat has
authority to decide and indeed two
countries have already formally proposed
that member states consider this matter
at the World Health Assembly and in a
final word a lot of attention has
focused on Taiwan's participation with
w-h-o and we understand that we are also
mindful that there are other places to
that for many different reasons look for
connections to w-h-o but it is not the
role of wgo staff to be involved in
geopolitical issues in fact our
principles of neutrality and
impartiality exist to keep us out of
those issues and to promote the role of
evidence evidence-based science in all
our work our role even when we operate
in sensitive political areas or in
complex humanitarian emergencies is to
follow the rules and policies that
Member States set out and working within
them to strengthen health systems and
access to health care for all people
everywhere others may want to add to
this thanks very much just one small
clarification on the issue of atypical
pneumonia is an extremely common form of
pneumonia that occurs around the world
there are millions of millions of cases
every year an atypical pneumonia
effectively refers to the fact that the
cause of the ammonia is usually a
typical are not necessarily diagnosed as
some of the normal causes of pneumonia
among the usual causes for a community
acquired pneumonia very often they can
test negative
Unferth testing and then they're
subsequently retested for specific
pathogens and studies I know up to
up to 1/3 of community-acquired
pneumonia can be considered to be a
typical in that you have other pathogens
that are found will be known as atypical
pathogens pathogens that don't typically
cause that type of pneumonia and
certainly at a global level they would
most be represented when they're finally
diagnosed by a Legionnaire Legionella
pneumonia chlamydia pneumonia and
mycoplasma pneumoniae as they as the
causes which are bacterial causes of
atypical pneumonia so the most common
causes of atypical pneumonia are
bacterial causes not necessarily viral
or others but obviously viruses can
cause atypical pneumonia but to say that
atypical pneumonia is a homonym for
Sarris is entirely incorrect I can also
supplement so just to say in the
beginning that email that that Steve
readout did not mention human to human
transmission and I think that is
important but from day one from all of
our experience with with other
respiratory pathogens and from SARS from
MERS you know you operate on the
possibility that that may be possible
and from the beginning with our partners
with our global expert networks with
with all of our internal staff at the
three levels of the organization
prepared for this and so even the first
notifications that we had through our
events information system which is what
Steve has mentioned which is the ihr
mechanism by which we notify all member
states and contact points we talked
about protection against acute
respiratory infections and there was
details in there about this and as more
information became available and as more
details come from the investigations
that are taking place we might you
modify the guidance having said that our
first technical package of guidance that
was issued to our emergency directors at
all of the regions to all of the wr's
and made public on our website put out
guidance preventing against human human
transmission and it focused on
transmission via respiratory droplets
and contact and in the situation of
health care settings focused on the
potential for aerosol transmission or
airborne transmission when you have
in the context of aerosol generating
procedures and again this is this is
based on our experience with other
respiratory pathogens and SARS MERS
influenza with with the first and
foremost idea to protect our health care
workers who are caring for patients and
this was before diagnostic tests were
even read widely available and so what
we aimed to do was immediately try to
put out information to warn all of our
member states and contact points about
how to find cases through surveillance
guidance how to collect samples safely
through our laboratory guidance how to
protect healthcare workers who are
caring for patients in our infection
prevention and control guidance how to
care for patients in our clinical
management guidance which was focused on
severe respiratory disease because again
even without information on the details
of what disease this might have caused
you anticipate that this would cause a
severe disease could cause a severe
disease and and lastly we also put out
readiness checklist which was a series
of questions which helped all everyone
look at how ready are we you know how
ready are we for an emerging respiratory
pathogen which is what this was and
we've said previously you know this this
kovat 19 virus Tsarskoe v2 turned out to
be the latest disease X and disease X is
is what we are all anticipating it's not
a matter of if it's a matter of when and
the DG has said this before so this was
something that could happen because
diseases come from you know they spill
over from animals and this is this is
happening all the time but we need to
ensure that we put out guidance as
quickly as possible to help prevent on
word spread protect people who are
caring for those patients thank you very
much for this answer on this topic next
question is from CNBC that's will will
hear us all right yeah can you hear me
yes please I wanted to ask the DG
mentioned earlier
about equitable distribution of
therapeutics and vaccines I wanted to
ask about Gilead Zaremba severe which
received emergency use authorization in
the US this past week the US government
is controlling the supply of REM
destined here REM disappear at the time
I'm wondering after W Joe would like to
comment specifically on that drug just
to say we are grateful that the company
Gilead and the Director General had
direct discussions at the highest level
to ensure that we were had access to the
remedy severe drug in order to launch
the Solidarity trials around the world
and just to remind everyone that REM de
severe is one of the arms of those
trials we welcome the recent data and
the on the from the randomized control
trials that were at the randomized
control trial that has been done in the
United States and there's signals of
hope there for the potential use of the
drug and we will be engaging in in
discussions with Gilead and the US
government as to how this drug may be
made more widely available as further
data emerges on its effectiveness but we
are grateful for the fact that the drug
is within the Solidarity trials and that
drug was provided by the company for
that purpose thank you thank you very
much we have time for maybe two more
questions so let's say AFP and Nina
Larson you know can we hear Nyna
if you can unmute yourself please hello
can you hear me yes no it's okay okay
thank you thanks for taking my question
so I had a question about President
Trump and secretaries might have said
that they've seen enormous evidence
virus originated in Wuhan I'm just
wondering if the US has discussed or
shared this evidence with the w-h-o and
if the whu-oh is looking to investigate
these claims if or when you're invited
to
to participate in investigations into
the origin of thanks so I can start and
perhaps Mike would like to supplement so
let me start with the public health
importance of really understanding where
this SARS Coby - virus the virus that
causes cope at nineteen comes from
what's really important is for us to
understand the the zoonotic source what
we call the animal source this is a
corona virus and corona viruses
circulate in bats and so there's an
ancestral link to bats and that is
something that we know based on the
genetic sequences of this virus and
other corona viruses that circulate
globally so we know that bats are an
ancestral link what we really need to
understand is the intermediate host the
animal that was infected by bats and
that infected people in some of these
early in the earliest cases and that's a
very important piece to understand from
a public health perspective so that we
could prevent that from happening again
we've learned this in MERS for example
in the beginning we didn't know the
intermediate host for MERS and there
were investigations that were taking
place in the Middle East and there was a
link that was made with dromedary camels
there this happens for a lot of these
zoonotic pathogens and what we need to
do is we need to do these these
investigations these studies to better
understand what is the animal host for
kovat 19 we have discussed this with our
colleagues in China and we discussed it
during the mission that I took part in
in February and one of the
recommendations was to be able to do
those investigations and do those with
our colleagues at FAO and oh eyyy and
different ministries across China and
this is an important part of the of our
understanding of how this all began so
that we could prevent it from happening
further from all of the evidence that we
have seen from all of the sequences that
are available and there are I believe
more than 15,000 full genome sequences
available or close to 15,000 that this
virus is of natural origin but we do
need to still find the intermediate host
in China and that is something we are
very supportive of to provide
support to our colleagues in China and
just a supplement on your first question
no we have not received any data or
specific evidence from u.s. government
relating to the purported origin of the
virus so from our perspective this
remains speculative and and but any like
any evidence based organization we would
be very willing to receive any
information that purports to the origin
of the virus because as Maria said the
origin of the virus is a very important
piece of public health information for
future control so if that data and
evidence is available then it will be
for the United States government to
decide whether and when it can be shared
but it's difficult for da miedo to
operate in an information vacuum in that
specific regard so we focus on what we
know we focus on the evidence we have
and the evidence we have from the
sequencing and from all that we have
been advised is the the the virus itself
is of natural origin and we need to
understand more about that natural
origin and particularly about
intermediate hosts and this issue was
one of the recommendations of the
Emergency Committee in 30th of January
it was subsequently repeated in the
advice the other day the Director
General when he visited China with when
I was there with them raised the issue
at the highest level not as a specific
issue and we've been saying this since
the beginning we have to control this
outbreak and this is the most important
thing we have to do but we have to also
understand the origin so that we can put
in place the right public health and
animal human interface policies that
will prevent this happening again this
is not unique we have done the same in
the Middle East with MERS we have done
the same with Ebola in Africa
understanding the host and understanding
the intermediate species and
understanding how to protect human
beings in that cycle is exceptionally
important whether that requires changes
in our engagement with the natural
environment whether it requires changes
in animal husbandry when it requires
changes along the food chain we won't
know exactly how that is to be managed
unless we understand the animal host
and the animal intermediate species and
that's an exceptionally important piece
of information right now we have to deal
with the pandemic and we've got to get
it under control but that does not
lessen the importance of doing that or
the work we have offered as we do in
every case with every country assistance
we're carrying out those investigations
and I'm sure our colleagues and we and
FAO are equally keen to to to offer that
support but again a bit like the mission
in February we need to understand that
we can learn from Chinese scientists we
can learn from each other we can
exchange knowledge and we can find the
answers together if this is projected as
aggressive investigation of wrongdoing
then I believe that's much more
difficult to do but that's a political
issue that is not a science issue we see
scientists in China communicating
collaborating around the world right the
way through this pandemic we would like
to see that spirit continue and we would
like to see scientists at the center of
the exploration of the source of this
science needs to be at the center
science will find the answers the
implications of those answers can be
dealt with from a policy and political
perspective so if we have a
science-based investigation and a
science-based inquiry as to what the
origin species and the intermediate
species are then that will benefit
everybody on the planet and we believe
that can be achieved with the
appropriate approach to that a very
important question thank you very much
let's maybe try to take one more
question before we conclude this press
briefing it's Simon
atever from today news Africa Simon can
you hear us
hello yes yes we can hear you okay can
you hear me yes okay my name is Simon
Activa from today news Africa and
Washington DC
waho Africa released a statement not
long ago about
that w-h-o welcomes traditional medicine
I wanted octo teachers to expand on that
what they mean by traditional medicine
women black magic or what I mean and I
also wanted w-h-o to react to the
controversial bill being introduced in
Algeria the infectious disease bill do
you you concerned uh some some
government may use the corona virus to
turn their country into a police state
thank you what wh oh and I think our
African regional office released a
statement on this does support to use as
we do all over the world of there's a
difference here between what our natural
remedies or natural supplements where
people take things to feel better and if
people want to take a honey and lemon
drink in order to ward off infectious
diseases that's a very different thing
to take in a drug with an active
ingredient
whether that's of natural or
pharmaceutical origin what we're talking
about here are potential treatments that
have active pharmaceutical ingredients
and an active pharmaceutical ingredient
can help you if it's targeted at the
virus that's infecting you but it can
also hurt you if it affects any other
system and doesn't deal with the virus
so what we tried to do in medicine it's
not make the difference between what our
pharmaceutical agents and what our
traditional I think what we found more
and more in the world that sometimes
what ends up as a firm as an age as an
agent or as a drug coming from from the
pharmaceutical side very often starts as
a traditional medicine aspirin and she
malarial treatments many of these came
from traditional medicines that were
well recognized by communities and then
when the active ingredient is identified
that's often taken and developed and
scaled up and put into tablets so we
must recognize that traditional medicine
has a value has a value both clinically
and so
and culturally but what we do want to
make sure is that any of those products
that have active pharmaceutical
ingredients in them are tested in the
same way as normal drugs and
particularly in the context of Africa we
want to make sure that any material any
drug going into the body of an African
gets exactly the same testing and safety
and efficacy trial there's it would in
any other part of the world so this is
not about denying Africans traditional
therapies this is about making sure that
those therapies are safe and effective
when whu-oh will support those
researchers who have traditional
medicines that are have some potential
or showing some promise or have some
indication that they may work and we
will support them in in building the
necessary clinical trials that can test
the safety and efficacy of those of
those potential traditional remedies
this is both as a way to protect people
from remedies that may hurt them but
also to select out those remedies that
may actually work in this case just to
supplement that you know I agree with
everything my kids just said of course
but the idea of traditional medicines
particularly for Cova 19 is something
that is is well under investigation
there's hundreds of clinical trials that
are ongoing right now and it is
important that these are done through
these these types of studies called
clinical trials even within China the
use of traditional medicine many of them
are under clinical clinical trials
evaluation right now and I haven't seen
the full statement from our regional
office but whu-oh has been working with
a number of research groups to ensure
that any drugs any whether it's
traditional medicine or whether it's you
know Western quote/unquote Western
medicine that these are done and
evaluated through clinical trials to
ensure their safety and their efficacy
and clinical trials should be conducted
the same way no matter where they're
conducted no matter which continent they
are conducted on no matter which
individuals that they involve they need
follow the same scientific and ethical
principles all over the world yeah thank
you just very very brief there are many
traditional medicines actually that are
beneficial and that's why we have a unit
in WH er that follows traditional
medicine but as has been said the use of
any traditional medicine should pass
through a very rigorous trial like the
modern medicine before it's used for
anyone so that's our our position but we
we encourage traditional medicine thank
you thank you very much conclude the
press conference here audio file will be
sent to you shortly as well as the
opening remarks of D G transcript will
be available most likely tomorrow we
have also just sent you invitation for
the press conference of our regional
office in Americas that will take place
tomorrow I wish everyone a very nice
evening